14. Schizophrenia (Heidelb). 2024 Apr 8;10(1):44. doi: 10.1038/s41537-024-00460-6.

Transplantation of gut microbiota derived from patients with schizophrenia induces schizophrenia-like behaviors and dysregulated brain transcript response in mice.

Schizophrenia (SCZ), as a neurodevelopmental disorder and devastating disease, affects approximately 1% of the world population. Although numerous studies have attempted to elucidate the causes of SCZ occurrence, it is not clearly understood. Recently, the emerging roles of the gut microbiota in a range of brain disorders, including SCZ, have attracted much attention. While the molecular mechanism of gut microbiota in regulating the pathogenesis of SCZ is still lacking. Here, we first confirmed the difference of gut microbiome between SCZ patients and healthy controls, and then, we performed fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) to clarify the roles of SCZ patients-derived microbiota in a specific pathogen free (SPF) mice model. 16 S rDNA sequencing confirmed that a significant difference of gut microbiome was present between two groups of FMT mice, which has a similar trend with the above human gut microbiome. Furthermore, we found that transplantation of fecal microbiota from SCZ patients into SPF mice was sufficient to induce schizophrenia-like (SCZ-like) symptoms, such as deficits in sociability and hyperactivity. Furthermore, the brains of mice colonized with SCZ microbiota displayed dysregulated transcript response and alternative splicing of SCZ-relevant genes. Moreover, 10 key genes were identified to be correlated with SCZ by an integrative transcriptome data analysis. Finally, 4 key genes were identified to be correlated with the 12 differential genera between two groups of FMT mice. Our results thus demonstrated that the gut microbiome might modify the transcriptomic profile in the brain, thereby modulating social behavior, and our present study can help better understand the link between gut microbiota and SCZ pathogenesis through the gut-brain axis.