197. Trials. 2023 Apr 12;24(1):268. doi: 10.1186/s13063-023-07137-y.

Effects of prebiotic supplement on gut microbiota, drug bioavailability, and adverse effects in patients with colorectal cancer at different primary tumor locations receiving chemotherapy: study protocol for a randomized clinical trial.

BACKGROUND: The prevalence of colorectal cancer (CRC) worldwide is a huge challenge to human health. Primary tumor locations found to impact prognosis and response to therapy. The important role of gut microbiota in the progression and treatment of CRC has led to many attempts of alleviating chemotherapy-induced adverse effects using microecologics. However, the underlying mechanism of the difference in the prognosis of different primary tumor locations and the synergistic effect of prebiotics on chemotherapy need to be further elucidated. This study aims to explore the differences in tumor microbiota and examine the effectiveness of xylooligosaccharides (XOS) on gut microbiota, adverse effects, and bioavailability of chemotherapy drugs in CRC patients at different primary tumor locations.
METHODS: This is a double-blinded, randomized, parallel controlled clinical trial. Participants with left-sided CRC (LSCRC, n = 50) and right-sided CC (RSCC, n = 50) will randomly allocated to prebiotic group (n = 25) or control group (n = 25) and will receive either a daily XOS (3 g/day) or placebo, respectively, for 12 weeks. The primary outcomes will be the differences in the mucosa microbiota composition at different tumor locations and differences in gut microbiota composition, adverse effects, and blood concentration of capecitabine posttreatment. The secondary outcomes will include other blood indicators, short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) concentration, quality of life, and mental health.
DISCUSSION: This study will reveal the potential benefits of prebiotic for improving the gut microbiota composition, alleviating the adverse effects, and improving the efficacy of chemotherapy in patients with CRC. In addition, this study will provide data on the different distribution of tumor microbiota and the different changes of gut microbiota during treatment in LSCRC and RSCC, which may provide novel insights into personalized cancer treatment strategies based on primary tumor locations and gut microbiota in the future. TRIAL REGISTRATION: Chinese Clinical Trial Registry ( www.chictr.org.cn ).