107. Int J Eat Disord. 2023 Nov;56(11):2001-2011. doi: 10.1002/eat.24033. Epub 2023 Aug 7.

Challenges and priorities for researching the gut microbiota in individuals living with anorexia nervosa.

OBJECTIVE: The gut microbiota is implicated in several symptoms and biological pathways relevant to anorexia nervosa (AN). Investigations into the role of the gut microbiota in AN are growing, with a specific interest in the changes that occur in response to treatment. Findings suggest that microbial species may be associated with some of the symptoms common in AN, such as depression and gastrointestinal disturbances (GID). Therefore, researchers believe the gut microbiota may have therapeutic relevance. Whilst research in this field is rapidly expanding, the unique considerations relevant to conducting gut microbiota research in individuals with AN must be addressed.
METHOD: We provide an overview of the published literature investigating the relationship between the gut microbiota and symptoms and behaviors present in AN, discuss important challenges in gut microbiota research, and offer recommendations for addressing these. We conclude by summarizing research design priorities for the field to move forward.
RESULTS: Several ways exist to reduce participant burden and accommodate challenges when researching the gut microbiota in individuals with AN.
DISCUSSION: Recommendations from this article are foreseen to encourage scientific rigor and thoughtful protocol planning for microbiota research in AN, including ways to reduce participant burden. Employing such methods will contribute to a better understanding of the role of the gut microbiota in AN pathophysiology and treatment.
PUBLIC SIGNIFICANCE: The field of gut microbiota research is rapidly expanding, including the role of the gut microbiota in anorexia nervosa. Thoughtful planning of future research will ensure appropriate data collection for meaningful interpretation while providing a positive experience for the participant. We present current challenges, recommendations for research design and priorities to facilitate the advancement of research in this field.