157. Brain Behav Immun Health. 2023 Apr 24;30:100628. doi: 10.1016/j.bbih.2023.100628. eCollection 2023 Jul.

Sex-specific effects of voluntary wheel running on behavior and the gut microbiota-immune-brain axis in mice.

Physical exercise has been positioned as a promising strategy to prevent and/or alleviate anxiety and depression, but the biological processes associated with its effects on mental health have yet to be entirely determined. Although the prevalence of depression and anxiety in women is about twice that of men, very few studies have examined whether physical exercise could affect mental health differently according to sex. This study examined, in singly-housed mice, the sex-specific effects of voluntary exercise on depressive- and anxiety-like behaviors as well as on different markers along the gut microbiota-immune-brain axis. Male and female C57BL/6N mice had voluntary access to running wheels in their home-cages for 24 days or were left undisturbed in identical home-cages without running wheels. Behaviors were then examined in the open field, splash, elevated plus maze, and tail suspension tests. Gene expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines, microglia activation-related genes, and tight junction proteins was determined in the jejunum and the hippocampus, while microbiota composition and predicted function were verified in cecum contents. Voluntary exercise reduced anxiety-like behaviors and altered grooming patterns in males exclusively. Although the exercise intervention resulted in changes to brain inflammatory activity and to cecal microbiota composition and inferred function in both sexes, reductions in the jejunal expression of pro-inflammatory markers were observed in females only. These findings support the view that voluntary exercise, even when performed during a short period, is beneficial for mental and intestinal health and that its sex-specific effects on behavior could be, at least in part, related to some components of the gut microbiota-immune-brain axis.