138. Nutrients. 2023 Aug 25;15(17):3715. doi: 10.3390/nu15173715.

Influence of Food Type on Human Psychological-Behavioral Responses and Crime Reduction.

The purpose of this narrative review is to emphasize the importance of food consumption and meal selection on mental health and brain function, including psychological and behavioral reactions such as mood, loving relationships, violence, and criminal activity. Additionally, by being aware of the link between food and mental health, the community can be encouraged to make informed food choices in order to avoid unfavorable outcomes like criminality. Food behaviors are shifting significantly over the world. There are also significant changes in mood, sadness, happiness, and violence, as well as the spread of the variety and severity of mental diseases that lead to violent acts. Food intake and meal selection have evolved over the last ten years as the variety and accessibility of food options have become easier and more diverse. These modifications might have both beneficial and bad consequences. This article examines the relationship between food intake and its impact on marital satisfaction. The goal of this review is to support or refute the claim that food influences mood, love, or criminal behavior, or vice versa. Various diets can have an impact on one's mental health and brain, influencing psychological reactions and behavioral responses such as mood, loving relationships, violence, and even criminal activity. Food insecurity has been demonstrated in various studies to have a negative impact on health and psychological well-being, leading to despair, loss of happiness, marital conflict, and violence. For example, herbal extracts and flavonoids have the potential to improve gut microbiota and treat mood disorders. Understanding how the gut-brain axis communicates might help guide interventions for mood and cognitive function. Since the root of most diseases and behaviors is significantly related to the type of food consumed, this research addresses this issue in order to reduce the cost of treatment and prevention of crime and delinquency at the community level by consciously choosing the food consumed by the society. In other words, prevention is always better than cure.