267. J Eat Disord. 2022 Nov 3;10(1):154. doi: 10.1186/s40337-022-00681-z.

A critical analysis of eating disorders and the gut microbiome.

The gut microbiota, also known as our "second brain" is an exciting frontier of research across a multitude of health domains. Gut microbes have been implicated in feeding behaviour and obesity, as well as mental health disorders including anxiety and depression, however their role in the development and maintenance of eating disorders (EDs) has only recently been considered. EDs are complex mental health conditions, shaped by a complicated interplay of factors. Perhaps due to an incomplete understanding of the etiology of EDs, treatment remains inadequate with affected individuals likely to face many relapses. The gut microbiota may be a missing piece in understanding the etiology of eating disorders, however more robust scientific inquiry is needed in the field before concrete conclusions can be made. In this spotlight paper, we critically evaluate what is known about the bi-directional relationship between gut microbes and biological processes that are implicated in the development and maintenance of EDs, including physiological functioning, hormones, neurotransmitters, the central nervous system, and the immune system. We outline limitations of current research, propose concrete steps to move the field forward and, hypothesize potential clinical implications of this research. Our gut is inhabited by millions of bacteria which have more recently been referred to as "our second brain". In fact, these microbes are thought to play a role in ED behaviour, associated anxiety and depression, and even affect our weight. Recent research has dove into this field with promising findings that have the potential to be applied clinically to improve ED recovery. The present paper discusses what is known about the gut microbiome in relation to EDs and the promising implications that leveraging this knowledge, through fecal microbiome transplants, probiotics, and microbiome-directed supplemental foods, could have on ED treatment.