295. PLoS One. 2022 Sep 1;17(9):e0273855. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0273855. eCollection 2022.

Meals, Microbiota and Mental Health in Children and Adolescents (MMM-Study): A protocol for an observational longitudinal case-control study.

Recent studies indicate that the interplay between diet, intestinal microbiota composition, and intestinal permeability can impact mental health. More than 10% of children and adolescents in Iceland suffer from mental disorders, and rates of psychotropics use are very high. The aim of this novel observational longitudinal case-control study, "Meals, Microbiota and Mental Health in Children and Adolescents (MMM-Study)" is to contribute to the promotion of treatment options for children and adolescents diagnosed with mental disorders through identification of patterns that may affect the symptoms. All children and adolescents, 5-15 years referred to the outpatient clinic of the Child and Adolescent Psychiatry Department at The National University Hospital in Reykjavik, Iceland, for one year (n≈150) will be invited to participate. There are two control groups, i.e., sex-matched children from the same postal area (n≈150) and same parent siblings (full siblings) in the same household close in age +/- 3 years (n<150). A three-day food diary, rating scales for mental health, and multiple questionnaires will be completed. Biosamples (fecal-, urine-, saliva-, blood samples, and buccal swab) will be collected and used for 16S rRNA gene amplicon sequencing of the oral and gut microbiome, measurements of serum factors, quantification of urine metabolites and host genotype, respectively. For longitudinal follow-up, data collection will be repeated after three years in the same groups. Integrative analysis of diet, gut microbiota, intestinal permeability, serum metabolites, and mental health will be conducted applying bioinformatics and systems biology approaches. Extensive population-based data of this quality has not been collected before, with collection repeated in three years' time, contributing to the high scientific value. The MMM-study follows the "Strengthening the Reporting of Observational Studies in Epidemiology" (STROBE) guidelines. Approval has been obtained from the Icelandic National Bioethics Committee, and the study is registered with Clinicaltrials.gov. The study will contribute to an improved understanding of the links between diet, gut microbiota and mental health in children through good quality study design by collecting information on multiple components, and a longitudinal approach. Furthermore, the study creates knowledge on possibilities for targeted and more personalized dietary and lifestyle interventions in subgroups. Trial registration numbers: VSN-19-225 & NCT04330703.