27. Cureus. 2024 Mar 7;16(3):e55733. doi: 10.7759/cureus.55733. eCollection 2024 Mar.

A Possible Role of Akkermansia muciniphila in the Treatment of Olanzapine-Induced Weight Gain.

Second-generation antipsychotics are mainly used in both acute and long-term treatment of major psychiatric disorders. Although better tolerated than first-generation antipsychotic drugs, they can frequently induce weight gain and metabolic disorders, of these, olanzapine is one of the drugs more likely to induce these side effects. There is consistent evidence of the role of gut microbiota in modulating the gut-brain axis with complex crosstalk with the host involving satiety signaling pathways, food intake behavior, and weight and metabolic regulation. Second-generation antipsychotics induce important gut microbiota modification thus contributing together with the central and peripheral receptors blockade mechanism to weight gain induction and metabolic impairment. These drugs can alter the composition of gut microbiota and induce dysbiosis, often reducing the concentration of Akkermansia muciniphila, a bacterium that is also decreased in patients with diabetes, obesity, metabolic syndrome, or chronic inflammatory diseases. Probiotic administration can be a safe and well-tolerated approach to modulate microbiota and offer an integrative strategy in psychiatric patients suffering antipsychotic side effects. Multiple strain probiotics and Akkermansia muciniphila alone have been administered both in mice models and in clinical populations demonstrating efficacy on antipsychotic-induced metabolic impairment and showing a contribution in reducing induced weight gain. Akkermansia muciniphila can improve several parameters altered by olanzapine administration, such as weight gain, insulin resistance, hyperglycemia, liver function, systemic inflammation, and gut barrier function. Although we do not have jet trials in the psychiatric population, this probiotic may be a complementary approach to treating olanzapine-induced weight gain and metabolic side effects.