259. J Affect Disord. 2022 Nov 15;317:156-165. doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2022.08.087. Epub 2022 Aug 26.

Effects of spleen nerve denervation on depression-like phenotype, systemic inflammation, and abnormal composition of gut microbiota in mice after administration of lipopolysaccharide: A role of brain-spleen axis.

BACKGROUND: Accumulating evidence suggests the role of brain-spleen axis as well as brain-gut-microbiota axis in inflammation-related depression. The spleen mediates anti-inflammatory effects of the vagus nerve which plays a role in depression. However, the role of spleen nerve in inflammation-related depression remains unclear.
METHODS: The effects of the splenic nerve denervation (SND) in the depression-like phenotype, systemic inflammation, and abnormal composition of gut microbiota in adult mice after administration of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) were examined.
RESULTS: LPS (0.5 mg/kg) caused depression-like phenotype, systemic inflammation, splenomegaly, increased expression of Iba1 (ionized calcium-binding adapter molecule 1) and decreased expression of postsynaptic density protein-95 (PSD-95) in the hippocampus in the sham-operated mice. In contrast, LPS did not produce depression-like phenotype, and abnormal expressions of Iba1 and PSD-95 in the hippocampus in the SND-operated mice. Furthermore, SND significantly blocked LPS-induced increased plasma levels of pro-inflammatory cytokine interleukin-6 although SND did not affect LPS-induced splenomegaly and increased plasma levels of tumor necrosis factor-α in mice. There were significant changes in several microbiota among the four groups. Interestingly, there were correlations between the relative abundance of several microbiota and Iba1 (or PSD-95) expression in the hippocampus. In addition, expression of Iba1 in the hippocampus was correlated with the relative abundance of several microbiota.
LIMITATIONS: Detailed mechanisms are unclear.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that the splenic nerve plays a role in inflammation-related depression, microglial activation in the hippocampus, and that gut microbiota may regulate microglial function in the brain via gut-microbiota-brain axis.