269. Pathogens. 2022 Nov 1;11(11):1279. doi: 10.3390/pathogens11111279.

The Role of the Microbiome in the Metabolic Health of People with Schizophrenia and Related Psychoses: Cross-Sectional and Pre-Post Lifestyle Intervention Analyses.

The microbiome has been implicated in the development of metabolic conditions which occur at high rates in people with schizophrenia and related psychoses. This exploratory proof-of-concept study aimed to: (i) characterize the gut microbiota in antipsychotic naïve or quasi-naïve people with first-episode psychosis, and people with established schizophrenia receiving clozapine therapy; (ii) test for microbiome changes following a lifestyle intervention which included diet and exercise education and physical activity. Participants were recruited from the Eastern Suburbs Mental Health Service, Sydney, Australia. Anthropometric, lifestyle and gut microbiota data were collected at baseline and following a 12-week lifestyle intervention. Stool samples underwent 16S rRNA sequencing to analyse microbiota diversity and composition. Seventeen people with established schizophrenia and five people with first-episode psychosis were recruited and matched with 22 age-sex, BMI and ethnicity matched controls from a concurrent study for baseline comparisons. There was no difference in α-diversity between groups at baseline, but microbial composition differed by 21 taxa between the established schizophrenia group and controls. In people with established illness pre-post comparison of α-diversity showed significant increases after the 12-week lifestyle intervention. This pilot study adds to the current literature that detail compositional differences in the gut microbiota of people with schizophrenia compared to those without mental illness and suggests that lifestyle interventions may increase gut microbial diversity in patients with established illness. These results show that microbiome studies are feasible in patients with established schizophrenia and larger studies are warranted to validate microbial signatures and understand the relevance of lifestyle change in the development of metabolic conditions in this population.