228. Sci Total Environ. 2023 Jan 20;857(Pt 1):159305. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2022.159305. Epub 2022 Oct 8.

Effects of urban particulate matter on gut microbiome and partial schizophrenia-like symptoms in mice: Evidence from shotgun metagenomic and metabolomic profiling.

BACKGROUND: Epidemiological evidence reported that particulate matter (PM) was associated with increased schizophrenia (SCZ) risk. Disturbance of gut microbiome was involved in SCZ. However, it remains unclear whether PM induces SCZ-like symptoms and how gut microbiome regulates them. Therefore, a multi-omics animal experiment was conducted to verify how urban PM induces SCZ-like behavior and altered gut microbiota and metabolic pathways.
METHODS: Using a completely random design, mice were divided into three groups: PM group, control group and MK801 group, which received daily tracheal instillation of PM solution, sterile PBS solution and intraperitoneal injection of MK801 (establish SCZ model), respectively. After a 14-day intervention, feces were collected for multi-omics testing (shotgun metagenomic sequencing and untargeted metabolomic profiling), followed by open field test, tail suspension test, and passive avoidance test. Besides, fecal microbiome of PM group and control group were transplanted into "pseudo-sterile" mice, then behavioral tests were conducted.
RESULTS: Similar to MK801 group, mice in PM group showed SCZ-like symptoms, including increased spontaneous activity, excitability, anxiety and decreased learning and spatial memory. PM exposure significantly increased the relative abundance of Verrucomicrobia and decreased that of Fibrobacteres et al. The metabolism pathways of estrogen signaling (estriol, 16-glucuronide-estriol and 21-desoxycortisol) and choline metabolism (phosphocholine) were significantly altered by PM exposure. Verrucomicrobia was negatively correlated with the level of estriol, which was correlated with decreased learning and spatial memory. Fibrobacteres and Deinococcus-Thermus were positively correlated with the level of phosphocholine, which was correlated with increased spontaneous activity, excitability and anxiety. Fecal microbiome transplantation from PM group mice reproduced excitability and anxiety symptoms.
CONCLUSIONS: Exposure to PM may affect composition of gut microbiome and alterations of estrogen signaling pathway and choline metabolism pathway, which were associated with partial SCZ-like behaviors. But whether gut microbiome regulates these metabolic pathways and behaviors remains to be determined.