36. HRB Open Res. 2024 Feb 26;6:62. doi: 10.12688/hrbopenres.13794.2. eCollection 2023.

Impact of dietary fiber on gut microbiota composition, function and gut-brain-modules in healthy adults - a systematic review protocol.

BACKGROUND: The gut microbiota has been extensively implicated in health and disease. The functional outputs of the gut microbiota, such as microbial metabolites, are considered particularly important in this regard. Significant associations exist between alterations in the relative abundance of specific microbial taxa and mental health disorders. Dietary fiber has the potential to alter gut microbiota composition and function, modifying bacterial enzymatic function and the production of metabolites. As many taxa of microorganisms have enzymes capable of producing or degrading neurochemicals i.e. neuroactive gut brain modules, new predictive tools can be applied to existing datasets such as those harvested from dietary fiber interventions. We endeavor to perform a systematic review in order to identify studies reporting compositional gut microbiota alterations after interventions with dietary fiber in healthy individuals. We aim to also extract from the selected studies publicly available microbial genomic sequence datasets for reanalysis with a consistent bioinformatics pipeline, with the ultimate intention of identifying altered gut brain modules following dietary fiber interventions.
METHODS: Interventional trials and randomized controlled studies that are originally published, including cross-over and non-crossover design and involving healthy adult humans will be included. A systematic search of PubMed/MEDLINE and EMBASE, two electronic databases, will be completed.
DISCUSSION: Various types of dietary fiber have an impact on the gut microbiota composition, with some promoting the growth of particular taxa while others are reduced in relative abundance. Our search focuses on the impact of this food component on the microbiota of healthy individuals. Compositional gut microbial changes have been reported and our review will compile and update these observations after reanalysis of their datasets with a consistent bioinformatic pipeline. From this it may be possible to predict more detailed functional consequences in terms of neuroactive gut brain modules, of the compositional alterations in gut microbial taxa.