341. Biomed Pharmacother. 2022 May;149:112797. doi: 10.1016/j.biopha.2022.112797. Epub 2022 Mar 10.

Targeting NLRP3 inflammasome modulates gut microbiota, attenuates corticospinal tract injury and ameliorates neurobehavioral deficits after intracerebral hemorrhage in mice.

Intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH) has a high mortality and disability rate. Fewer studies focus on white matter injury (WMI) after ICH, especially the corticospinal tract (CST) injury located in the spinal cord, which correlates with motor impairments. Recent studies have shown that gut microbiota dysbiosis occurs after ICH. Furthermore, NLRP3 inflammasome can be activated after ICH, resulting in inflammatory cascade reactions and aggravating brain injury. However, no direct and causal correlation among NLRP3 inflammasome inhibition, altered gut microbiota, and CST injury following ICH has been reported. This study aimed to investigate the effect of MCC950, a selective NLRP3 inflammasome inhibitor, on the gut microbiota and CST injury after ICH. We observed that compared with the sham group, the members of Firmicutes, such as Faecalibaculum and Dubosiella, were depleted in the ICH + Vehicle group, whereas the members of Proteobacteria and Campilobacterota were enriched, such as Enterobacter and Helicobacter. After treatment with MCC950, the Bacteroides, Bifidobacterium and Paenibacillus were relatively abundant in the gut flora of mice. Moreover, we observed CST injury located in cervical enlargement of the spinal cord, and MCC950 alleviated it. Furthermore, treatment with MCC950 decreased the mNSS score and brain water content in ICH. Taken together, the present study showed that MCC950 modulated gut microbiota, effectively attenuated CST injury located in cervical enlargement of the spinal cord, and ameliorated neurological deficits after ICH. This study provided a novel report that links NLRP3 inflammasome inhibition, gut microbiota alteration and CST injury following ICH and profound implications for ICH treatment.