427. Brain Res Bull. 2021 Aug;173:66-73. doi: 10.1016/j.brainresbull.2021.05.012. Epub 2021 May 15.

Abnormalities in the composition of the gut microbiota in mice after repeated administration of DREADD ligands.

Designer Receptors Exclusively Activated by Designer Drugs (DREADDs) are known as genetically modified G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs), which can be activated by synthetic ligands such as clozapine N-oxide (CNO) and DREADD agonist 21 (compound 21: C21). The brain-gut-microbiota axis has a crucial role in bidirectional interactions between the brain and the gastrointestinal microbiota. In this study, we investigated whether repeated administration of CNO or C21 could influence the gut microbiota and short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) in feces of adult mice. Repeated administration of CNO or C21 as drinking water did not alter the α- and β-diversity of gut microbiota in mice compared with control mice. However, we found significant changes in relative abundance for several bacteria in the CNO (or C21) group at the taxonomic level compared to the control group. The linear discriminant analysis effect size (LEfSe) algorithm distinguished the family Prevotellaceae, the genus Anaerocolumna, the genus Prevotella, and the genus Frisingicoccus, these four specific microbial markers for the CNO group relative to the control group. In addition, the LEfSe algorithm identified the family Clostridiaceae, the genus Faecalicatena and the genus Marinisporobacter, these three bacteria of different taxonomic as potential microbial markers for the C21 group relative to the control group. In contrast, repeated administration of CNO (or C21) did not alter SCFAs in feces samples of adult mice. The data suggest that repeated administration of CNO or C21 contributes to an unusual organization of the gut microbiota in adult mice. Therefore, abnormalities in the composition of gut microbiota by repeated dosing of DREADD ligands should be taken into consideration for behavioral and biological functions in rodents treated with DREADD ligands.