440. Brain Behav Immun. 2021 Jul;95:401-412. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2021.04.014. Epub 2021 Apr 22.

Manipulations of the gut microbiome alter chemotherapy-induced inflammation and behavioral side effects in female mice.

Chemotherapy treatment is associated with acute behavioral side effects (fatigue, anorexia) that significantly reduce patient quality of life and are dose-limiting, thereby increasing mortality (Kidwell et al., 2014). Disruptions to gut homeostasis (diarrhea, constipation, microbial dysbiosis) are also observed in patients receiving chemotherapy. In non-oncological patients, facets of mental health (fatigue, anxiety, depression) correlate with alterations in the gut microbiome, suggestive of a contribution of the gut in CNS disease etiology. The potential gut-to-brain pathway is poorly understood in patients receiving chemotherapy. Our prior studies have demonstrated a correlation between chemotherapy treatment, gut changes, peripheral and central inflammation, and behavioral symptoms in mice. Here we aimed to determine the extent to which chemotherapy-associated gut manipulations modulate the behavioral and biological consequences of chemotherapy. We measured sickness behaviors, peripheral and central inflammatory mediators, and anxiety in conventional or germ-free female mice: 1) cohabitating with mice of the opposite treatment group, 2) pre-treated with broad-spectrum antibiotics, or 3) given an intra-gastric gavage of gut content from chemotherapy-treated mice. In cohabitation studies, presumed coprophagia promoted body mass recovery, however strong associations with inflammation and behavior were not observed. Reduction of gut microbial alpha diversity via antibiotics did not prevent chemotherapy-associated side effects, however the relative abundances of the genera Tyzzerella, Romboutsia, and Turicibacter correlated with circulating inflammatory (IL-1β) and behavioral outcomes (lethargy, anxiety-like behavior). A gut microbiota transplant from chemotherapy-treated mice decreased central locomotion in open field testing, increased circulating CXCL1, and increased hippocampal Il6 and Tnfa in germ-free mice compared to germ-free mice that received a transplant from vehicle-treated mice. Taken together, these data provide further evidence that the gut microbiota likely contributes to the development of chemotherapy-associated side effects. This work has significant implications in the future treatment of anxiety in patients, and warrants future studies using microbe-based treatment options.