71. Brain Behav Immun. 2024 Jan;115:280-294. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2023.10.031. Epub 2023 Oct 31.

Priming of microglia with dysfunctional gut microbiota impairs hippocampal neurogenesis and fosters stress vulnerability of mice.

BACKGROUND: Mental disorders may be involved in neuroinflammatory processes that are triggered by gut microbiota. How gut microbiota influence microglia-mediated sensitivity to stress remains unclear. Here we explored in an animal model of depression whether disruption of the gut microbiome primes hippocampal microglia, thereby impairing neurogenesis and sensitizing to stress.
METHODS: Male C57BL/6J mice were exposed to chronic unpredictable mild stress (CUMS) for 4 weeks, and effects on gut microbiota were assessed using 16S rRNA sequencing. Fecal microbiota was transplanted from control or CUMS mice into naïve animals. The depression-like behaviors of recipients were evaluated in a forced swimming test and sucrose preference test. The morphology and phenotype of microglia in the hippocampus of recipients were examined using immunohistochemistry, quantitative PCR, and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays. The recipients were treated with lipopolysaccharide or chronic stress exposure, and effects were evaluated on behavior, microglial responses and hippocampal neurogenesis. Finally, we explored the ability of minocycline to reverse the effects of CUMS on hippocampal neurogenesis and stress sensitivity in recipients.
RESULTS: CUMS altered the gut microbiome, leading to higher relative abundance of some bacteria (Helicobacter, Bacteroides, and Desulfovibrio) and lower relative abundance of some bacteria (Lactobacillus, Bifidobacterium, and Akkermansia). Fecal microbiota transplantation from CUMS mice to naïve animals induced microglial priming in the dentate gyrus of recipients. These microglia showed hyper-ramified morphology, and became more sensitive to LPS challenge or chronic stress, which characterized by more significant morphological changes and inflammatory responses, as well as impaired hippocampal neurogenesis and increased depressive-like behaviors. Giving minocycline to recipients reversed these effects of fecal transplantation.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that gut microbiota from stressed animals can induce microglial priming in the dentate gyrus, which is associated with a hyper-immune response to stress and impaired hippocampal neurogenesis. Remodeling the gut microbiome or inhibiting microglial priming may be strategies to reduce sensitivity to stress.