85. Gut Microbes. 2023 Dec;15(2):2278222. doi: 10.1080/19490976.2023.2278222. Epub 2023 Nov 9.

Gut microbiota and child behavior in early puberty: does child sex play a role?

A growing number of studies have indicated relations between the gut microbiota and mental health. However, to date, there is a scarcity of microbiota studies in community samples in early puberty. The current preregistered study (https://osf.io/wu2vt) investigated gut microbiota composition in relation to sex in low-risk children and explored behavioral associations with gut microbiota composition and metabolites in the same samples, together with the potential role of sex. Fecal microbiota composition was analyzed in 12-year-old children (N = 137) by 16S rRNA gene sequencing and quantitative PCR. Modest sex differences were observed in beta diversity. Generalized linear models showed consistent behavioral relations to both relative and absolute abundances of individual taxa, including positive associations between Parasutterella and mother-reported internalizing behavior, and negative associations between Odoribacter and mother-reported externalizing behavior. Additionally, Prevotella 9 was positively related to mother-reported externalizing behavior, confirming earlier findings on the same cohort at 5 years of age. Sex-related differences were found in behavioral relations to Ruminiclostridium 5, Alistipes, Streptococcus, Ruminiclostridium 9, Ruminococcaceae UCG-5, and Dialister, for relative abundances, as well as to Family XIII AD3011 group and an unidentified bacterium within the Tenericutes, for absolute abundances. Limited behavioral relations were observed regarding alpha diversity and fecal metabolites. Our findings describe links between the gut microbiota and child behavior, together with differences between child sexes in these relations, in low-risk early pubertal children. Importantly, this study confirmed earlier findings in this cohort of positive relations between Prevotella 9 and externalizing behavior at age 10 years. Results also show the merit of including absolute abundances in microbiota studies.