96. BMC Psychiatry. 2023 Nov 17;23(1):856. doi: 10.1186/s12888-023-05329-z.

Intricate role of intestinal microbe and metabolite in schizophrenia.

BACKGROUND: The brain-gut axis has gained increasing attention due to its contribution to the etiology of various central nervous system disorders. This study aims to elucidate the hypothesis that schizophrenia is associated with disturbances in intestinal microflora and imbalance in intestinal metabolites. By exploring the intricate relationship between the gut and the brain, with the goal of offering fresh perspectives and valuable insights into the potential contribution of intestinal microbial and metabolites dysbiosis to the etiology of schizophrenia.
METHODS: In this study, we used a 16S ribosomal RNA (16S rRNA) gene sequence-based approach and an untargeted liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry-based metabolic profiling approach to measure the gut microbiome and microbial metabolites from 44 healthy controls, 41 acute patients, and 39 remission patients, to evaluate whether microbial dysbiosis and microbial metabolite biomarkers were linked with the severity of schizophrenic symptoms.
RESULTS: Here, we identified 20 dominant disturbances in the gut microbial composition of patients compared with healthy controls, with 3 orders, 4 families, 9 genera, and 4 species. Several unique bacterial taxa associated with schizophrenia severity. Compared with healthy controls, 145 unusual microflora metabolites were detected in the acute and remission groups, which were mainly involved in environmental information processing, metabolism, organismal systems, and human diseases in the Kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes pathway. The Sankey diagram showed that 4 abnormal intestinal and 4 anomalous intestinal microbial metabolites were associated with psychiatric clinical symptoms.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest a possible interactive influence of the gut microbiota and their metabolites on the pathophysiology of schizophrenia.