47. Brain Behav. 2023 Aug;13(8):e3130. doi: 10.1002/brb3.3130. Epub 2023 Jun 20.

Parkinson's disease: Are gut microbes involved?

INTRODUCTION: Parkinson's disease (PD) is a neurodegenerative disorder that affects more than 10 million individuals worldwide. It is characterized by motor and sensory deficits. Research studies have increasingly demonstrated a correlation between Parkinson's disease and alternations in the composition of the gut microbiota in affected patients. Also, the significant role of prebiotics and probiotics in gastrointestinal and neurological conditions is imperative to understand their relation to Parkinson's disease.
METHOD: To explore the scientific interaction of the gut-microbiota-brain axis and its association with Parkinson's disease, a comprehensive narrative review of the relevant literature was conducted. Articles were retrieved systematically from reputable sources, including PubMed, Science Direct, World Health Organization (WHO), and Advanced Google Scholar. Key search terms included are "Parkinson's Disease", "Gut Microbiome", "Braak's Theory", "Neurological Disorders", and "Gut-brain axis". Articles included in our review are published in English and they provide detailed information on the relationship between Parkinson's disease and gut microbiota RESULTS: This review highlights the impact of gut microbiota composition and associated factors on the progression of Parkinson's disease. Evidence-based studies highlighting the existing evidence of the relationship between Parkinson's disease and alteration in gut microbiota are discussed. Consequently, the potential mechanisms by which the gut microbiota may affect the composition of the gut microbiota were revealed, with a particular emphasis on the role of the gut-brain axis in this interplay.
CONCLUSION: Understanding the complex interplay between gut microbiota and Parkinson's disease is a potential implication for the development of novel therapeutics against Parkinson's disease. Following the existing relationship demonstrated by different evidence-based studies on Parkinson's disease and gut microbiota, our review concludes by providing recommendations and suggestions for future research studies with a particular emphasis on the impact of the microbiota-brain axis on Parkinson's disease.