30. Microbiome. 2024 Feb 12;12(1):26. doi: 10.1186/s40168-024-01748-6.

Horizontal gene transfer after faecal microbiota transplantation in adolescents with obesity.

BACKGROUND: Horizontal gene transfer (HGT) describes the transmission of DNA outside of direct ancestral lineages. The process is best characterised within the bacterial kingdom and can enable the acquisition of genetic traits that support bacterial adaptation to novel niches. The adaptation of bacteria to novel niches has particular relevance for faecal microbiota transplantation (FMT), a therapeutic procedure which aims to resolve gut-related health conditions of individuals, through transplanted gut microbiota from healthy donors.
RESULTS: Three hundred eighty-one stool metagenomic samples from a placebo-controlled FMT trial for obese adolescents (the Gut Bugs Trial) were analysed for HGT, using two complementary methodologies. First, all putative HGT events, including historical HGT signatures, were quantified using the bioinformatics application WAAFLE. Second, metagenomic assembly and gene clustering were used to assess and quantify donor-specific genes transferred to recipients following the intervention. Both methodologies found no difference between the level of putative HGT events in the gut microbiomes of FMT and placebo recipients, post-intervention. HGT events facilitated by engrafted donor species in the FMT recipient gut at 6 weeks post-intervention were identified and characterised. Bacterial strains contributing to this subset of HGT events predominantly belonged to the phylum Bacteroidetes. Engraftment-dependent horizontally transferred genes were retained within recipient microbiomes at 12 and 26 weeks post-intervention.
CONCLUSION: Our study suggests that novel microorganisms introduced into the recipient gut following FMT have no impact on the basal rate of HGT within the human gut microbiome. Analyses of further FMT studies are required to assess the generalisability of this conclusion across different FMT study designs and for the treatment of different gut-related conditions. Video Abstract.