89. Nutr Neurosci. 2023 Oct;26(10):932-941. doi: 10.1080/1028415X.2022.2110189. Epub 2022 Aug 13.

The gut microbiome and cognition in Parkinson's disease: a systematic review.

BACKGROUND: The pathology underlying cognitive changes in people with Parkinson's disease (PD) is not well understood. In healthy older adults, gut microbiome composition has been associated with cognitive function. In people with PD, preliminary evidence suggests that cortical spreading of abnormal alpha-synuclein aggregates may be associated with cognitive impairment. As changes in the gut have been linked to PD onset and associated Lewy body pathology, an investigation of the gut microbiome and cognition in PD is warranted.
OBJECTIVE: To synthesise existing evidence on the relationship between the gut microbiome and cognitive function in PD.
METHODS: A systematic review was conducted to search for peer-reviewed articles and grey literature published to July 2021 across seven electronic databases (MEDLINE, EMBASE, PsycINFO, Scopus, Cochrane Library, ProQuest, and ProQuest Dissertations and Theses). English language articles reporting the relationship between cognition and the gut microbiome in human participants with PD were considered for inclusion. Results were qualitatively synthesised and evidence quality was assessed using the QualSyst tool for quantitative studies.
RESULTS: Five cross-sectional studies reporting the association between the gut microbiome and cognition in 395 participants with PD were included. Studies provided preliminary evidence of a relationship between cognition and gut microbiota within the Bacteroidetes and Firmicutes phyla, however, associations with specific genera were inconsistent across studies.
CONCLUSIONS: Some species of short-chain fatty acid-producing bacteria (e.g. acetate, butyrate, and propionate producers) appear to be reduced in participants with PD with cognitive impairment. More research with larger samples and more consistent methodology is needed to substantiate these findings.